Vodcast Transcript
Imagine stepping outside and feeling burning sensations, every day and its intensity is increasing every
year. And we look at the news we get to know about the heatwaves. And seems like this is going to be our
new normal. Not only heatwaves are becoming hotter, but they are more frequent and lasting longer. Let’s
investigate this situation with three key visualisations.
At first let’s investigate the global temperature trends over time, which I collected the visualisation from
NASA’s Scientific Visualisation Studio. In this visualisation we can see the global map and the colour
representing the temperature. Where the deep blue changes to red representing the temperature change
from cooling to hotter respectively over the period. As we can see at the very beginning in the year 1880 to
1884, polar region in the Northern hemisphere experiencing cool. However, over the period these changes,
nearly by 1993 the temperature over these regions started to increase. By the end of 2022, the change is
escalating towards heat around the globe and most changes occur in the polar region of northern
hemisphere.
This trend is not a random, according to the Farhan’s article published in Chatham 2024. The reason is
directly linked to the human activities like burning fossil fuels which releases greenhouse gases. And these
gasses trapped into the earth’s atmosphere creating more heat day by day.
Now, for those of us living in Australia let’s see what’s happening in today’s date. This visualisation is
taken from the Tabasco’s article heat waves intensification in Australia. This graph depicts various
extreme heat events in the year 2024. The first graph depicts the peak temperature, where central and
Western Australia experienced temperature more than 40°C, this sounds hot. The second map depicts the
number of heatwaves events throughout the year Tasmania having the most heatwaves events. The third
graph depicts the frequency of heatwaves throughout the year and the coastal regions seems to more
effected here. And the last map depicts the heat wave duration ranging from 2 to 8 days continuously.
Western and South Australia experienced most.
Due to this its effecting the public health, infrastructure and agriculture in Australia, pushing communities
to their limits according to the Zuo’s Journal.
Those are the current situation, so what about the upcoming years or future. According to the arc centre’
visualisation, Sydney Brisbane and Perth will see more than 40 days of extreme heat waves by 2050 to
2090. Darwin stands out by experiencing 150 days of extreme heat waves.
Climate adaption is more important than ever before because of the tremendous strain that this rising
temperature will put on ecosystems, infrastructure and heath care systems. We need take immediate action
by improving our infrastructure to bear the upcoming future.
Thank You :)
